Musical Building Blocks

Extract from Daniel Levitin (McGill University) 2006 book titled "This is Your Brain On Music" (ISBN 9781843547167)

The basic elements of any sound are loudness, pitch, contour, duration (or rhythm), tempo, timbre, spatial location, and reverberation. Our brains organize these fundamental perceptual attributes into higher level concepts, and these include meter, harmony, and melody. Music is perceived as multiple dimensions (attributes).

Pitch - A purely psychological construct, related both to the actual frequency of a particular tone and to its relative position in the musical scale. The two terms, _tone_ and _note_ refer to the same entiuty in the abstract, but we reserve the word _tone_ for what you hear, and the word _note_ for what you see written on a musical score.

Rhythm - Refers to the duration of a series of notes, and to the way that they group together.

Tempo - Refers to the overall speed or paceof the piece (how fast orslow these regular movements are).

Contour - Describes the overall shape of a melody, taking into account only the pattern of "up" and "down" (binary value, not an absolute/relative value).

Timbre - Distinguishes one instrument from another. It is a kind of tonalcolour thatis producedinpart by overtones from the instrument's vibrations. It also describes the way a single instrument can change sound as it moves across its range.

Loudness - A purely psychological construct that relates (nonlinearly) to how much energy an instrument creates (air displacement) and what an acoustician would call the amplitude of a tone.

Reverberation - A perception of how distant the source is from us in combination with how large a room or hall the music is in; often referred to as "echo". An underappreciated role in communicating emotion and creating an overall pleasing sound.

These basic elements are _seperable_. Each can be varied without altering the others. 

When these basic elements combine and form relationships with one another in a meaningfull way, they give rise to the following higher-order concepts;

Meter - Created by extracting information from rhythm and loudnesscues, and refers to the way in which tonesaregrouped with oneanotheracrosstime.

Key - A hierarchy of importance that exists between tones in a musical piece; a hierarchy that only exists in our mind as a function of our experiences.

Melody - The main theme of a musical piece, the succession of tones that are most salient in your mind. A notion that is different across genres.

Harmony - Relationships between pitches of different tones, and with tonal contexts that these pitches set up that ultimately lead to expectations for what will come next in a musical piece.
